Bode Miller: World's most creative skier
What I love about the Olympics is that they can be seen in many different ways: an affirmation of peace and internationalism; the pure joy of superb human performance; the less pure, but very human, identification with "our" athletes. I'll be on the edge of my chair this week for Bode Miller. Besides being the fastest skier in the world he is the most creative: his style is so original that ski experts are amazed it works. I root for him as something of a Mainer because he developed his Olympic capacity while going to high school in our state and (which comes to the same thing) as an individualist who does things his way -- experts be damned.

Many aspects of Bode would serve well for practicing the art of seeing the world through a lens focused on learning. Let me select one: what he shows us about the need for balance between independent thinking and learning from others. His original, and largely self-taught, style is so fast that nobody can get to the finish line before him -- but it is also so accident-prone that he sometimes loses by not getting there. I see this as an extreme case of the major dilemma facing parents and teachers today.

Once upon a time it was possible for a young person to learn the skills that would last a lifetime. But a different approach is needed to prepare kids for a world in which most people are doing jobs that did not exist when they were born. When the world changed slowly schools could be proud to send out graduates who knew how to do what they were taught. Today we need graduates who know how to do what they were NOT taught. But how far should we go? The major problem is striking the balance between encouraging independence and transmitting the inherited wisdom of the past. We want our children to have Bode's kind of independence. But we don't want them to fall for lack of mastery of well-tried ways of doing things.

Opportunities for developing independence are creeping into our homes most often without being noticed. Consider a simple incident: a 3-year-old goes to a shelf, pulls off a cassette and loads it into the VCR. People are wrong to be amazed at the technological capacity of the child. Getting dressed and playing with many traditional toys are actually more complicated than working a VCR or even clicking a computer program into life. What is remarkable is that the child is able to make a decision to spend the next half hour immersed in a topic of choice. When I was 3, I was dependent on adults for any access to what lay beyond immediate reach. And this is only just the beginning. Soon children who can't yet read will be clicking their way into more kinds of knowledge than I could get from a traditional encyclopedia.

